Hello Nextflow refresh including new modules on containers, config, nf-core, and seqera (#412)
nextflow-io/training: docs/hello_nextflow/02_hello_world.md

The console output should look similar.

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.02.0-edge

 ┃ Launching `hello-world.nf` [thirsty_gautier] DSL2 - revision: 6654bc1327

[10/15498d] sayHello [100%] 1 of 1, cached: 1 ✔
```

Notice the additional `cached:` bit in the process status line, which means that Nextflow has recognized that it has already done this work and simply re-used the result from the last run.

!!! note

    When your re-run a pipeline with `resume`, Nextflow does not overwrite any files written to a publishDir directory by any process call that was previously run successfully.

### Takeaway

You know how to to relaunch a pipeline without repeating steps that were already run in an identical way.

### What's next?

Learn how to add in variable inputs.

---

## 5. Add in variable inputs using a channel

So far, we've been emitting a greeting hardcoded into the process command.

> Now we're going to add some flexibility by using an input variable, so that we can easily change the greeting.
> This is going to require us to use a **channel**; more on that in a minute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we're going to add some flexibility by using an input variable, so that we can easily change the greeting.

This requires us to make a series of inter-related changes:

1. Tell the process about expected variable inputs using the `input:` block
2. Edit the process to use the input
3. Create a **channel** to pass input to the process (more on that in a minute)
4. Add the channel as input to the process call
```

I like the `tell them what you're going to tell them before you tell them' school of thought, maybe something like the above would be good? I was momentarily confused by the 'four changes' thing lower down.

### 5.1. Add an input definition to the process block

First we need to adapt the process definition to accept an input.

_Before:_

```groovy title="hello-world.nf" linenums="6"

> process sayHello {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
process sayHello {

    publishDir 'results', mode: 'copy'
```

---

## 6. Use CLI parameters for inputs

We want to be able to specify the input from the command line, since that is the piece that will almost always be different in subsequent runs of the workflow.

> Good news: Nextflow built-in workflow parameter system called `params`, which makes it easy to declare and use CLI parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Good news: Nextflow has a built-in workflow parameter system called `params`, which makes it easy to declare and use CLI parameters.
```

HELLO WORLD
```

!!! note

    This is a very naive text replacement one-liner that does not account for accented letters, so for example 'Holà' will become 'HOLà'. This is expected.

### 7.2. Make the command take a file as input and write the output to a file

> As previously, we want to output results to a dedicated file, which we name by prepending the original filename with `UPPER-`.

Reviewer: How about changing the command below to:

```
cat results/output.txt | tr '[a-z]' '[A-Z]' > UPPER-output.txt
```
?

output.txt does not exist at the root, which might confuse complete CLI novices.

}
```

This should produce a unique output file name for every call of each process.

### 8.5. Run the workflow and look at the results directory

Let's run it and check that it works.

```bash
nextflow run hello-world.nf
```

Reverting back to the summary view, the output looks like this again:

```console title="Output"
 N E X T F L O W   ~  version 24.02.0-edge

 ┃ Launching `hello-world.nf` [jovial_mccarthy] DSL2 - revision: 53f20aeb70

executor >  local (6)
[03/f007f2] sayHello (1)       [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
[e5/dd2890] convertToUpper (3) [100%] 3 of 3 ✔
```

But more importantly, now we have six new files in addition to the two we already had in the `results` directory:

```console title="Directory contents"
results
├── Bonjour-output.txt
├── Hello-output.txt
├── Holà-output.txt
├── output.txt
├── UPPER-Bonjour-output.txt
├── UPPER-Hello-output.txt
├── UPPER-Holà-output.txt
└── UPPER-output.txt
```

Success! Now we can add as many greetings as we like without worrying about output files being overwritten.

!!! note

>     In practice, naming files based on the input data itself is almost always impractical. The better way to generate dynamic filenames is to use a samplesheet contain relevant metadata (such as unique sample IDs) and create a map of metadata (aka metamap) from which we can grab an appropriate identifier to generate the filenames.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In practice, naming files based on the input data itself is almost always impractical. The better way to generate dynamic filenames is to use a samplesheet contain relevant metadata (such as unique sample IDs) and create a data structure called a 'map', which we pass to processes, and from which we can grab an appropriate identifier to generate the filenames.
```

Suggesting a simplification given the level of the audience at this stage.

    We'll show you how to do that later in this training course.

### Takeaway

You know how to feed a batch of multiple input elements through a channel.

### What's next?

Learn how to make the workflow take a file as its source of input values.

---

## 9. Modify the workflow to take a file as its source of input values

It's often the case that, when we want to run on a batch of multiple input elements, the input values are contained in a file.

> As an example, we provide you with a CSV file called `greetings.csv` in the `data/` directory, containing several greetings separated by commas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an example, we have provided you with a CSV file called `greetings.csv` in the `data/` directory, containing several greetings separated by commas.
```

_After:_

```groovy title="hello-world.nf" linenums="6"
/*
 * Pipeline parameters
 */
params.input_file = "data/greetings.csv"
```

### 9.2. Update the channel declaration to handle the input file

At this point we introduce a new channel constructor, `Channel.fromPath()`, which has some built-in functionality for handling file paths.
We're going to use that instead of the `Channel.of()` constructor we used previously; the base syntax looks like this:

```groovy title="channel construction syntax"
Channel.fromPath(input_file)
```

> Since our goal is to read in the contents of a `.csv` file, we're going to add the `.splitCsv()` operator to make Nextflow parse the file contents accordingly, as well as the `.flatten()` operator to turn the array element produced by `.splitCsv()` into a channel of individual elements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to deploy a new concept, an 'operator' to transform that CSV file into channel content. You'll learn more about operators later, but for now just understand them as ways of transforming channels in a variety of ways. 

Since our goal is to read in the contents of a `.csv` file, we're going to add the `.splitCsv()` operator to make Nextflow parse the file contents accordingly, as well as the `.flatten()` operator to turn the array element produced by `.splitCsv()` into a channel of individual elements.
```

I felt the need to actually introduce operators, since this is the first time we've mentioned them explicitly

    For example, if you add `greeting_ch.view()` anywhere in the workflow body, when you run the script, Nextflow will print the channel contents to standard out.

    You can also use this to inspect the effect of the operators.
    For example, the output of `Channel.fromPath(params.input_file).splitCsv().view()` will look like this:

    ```console title="Output"
    [Hello, Bonjour, Holà]
    ```

    While the output of `Channel.fromPath(params.input_file).splitCsv().flatten().view()` will look like this:

    ```console title="Output"
    Hello
    Bonjour
    Holà
    ```

### Takeaway

You know how to provide the input values to the workflow via a file.

More generally, you've learned how to use the essential components of Nextflow and you have a basic grasp of the logic of how to build a workflow and manage inputs and outputs.

### What's next?

Celebrate your success and take a break!

Don't worry if the channel types and operators feel like a lot to grapple with the first time you encounter them.
You'll get more opportunities to practice using these components in various settings as you work through this training course.

> When you're ready, move on to Part 2 to learn how to apply what you've learned to a more realistic data analysis use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you're ready, move on to Part 2 to learn about another important concept: provisioning the software required for each process. 
```
